# Intellectual property in the life sciences
To date, most societies rely mainly on IP in form of patents as means to enable and secure innovations in the life sciences. The productive use of intellectual property regimes based on patents today has reached its limits. During the workshop, citizens questioned the usefulness of the concept of patents for the natural resources unraveled through life science technologies. Precisely, how a genetic sequence, which was considered a digital code (a detailed examination of the ‘Code Duality’ see chapter ‘Bio-languages’), could fall under the protection of patents at all. Genetic code is highly redundant and the expressed proteins can have various context dependent functions. In enzymes for example, the same catalytic activity can be achieved by a variety of protein sequences, as only a few amino acid residues of the chain are evolutionary conserved. Furthermore, does not the artificial composition of a genetic code equate better to a creative procedure than to an actual invention and thus some kind of copyright based approach would eventually suit better? To apply for a patent, high costs for a patent search and international registration done by specialists have to be mounted by the inventor. The legal costs and risks can prevent individual inventors and small companies from securing their intellectual property through patents, limiting them in their abilities to cooperate and others in their abilities to build upon their work. A single patent becomes an asset as part of patent pool, far removed from its actual invention and its potential applications. Simultaneously, there is a tendency of patents to become increasingly ‘weak’, meaning is less focused on an actual invention and often simply applied for out of strategic considerations by big companies. The long lifetime of a patent (up to 20 years) further increases the difficulty to safely introduce new inventions to the market. Today, products are becoming increasingly complex depending on a large number of inventions. Further, the speed of innovation, especially of that in life sciences has dramatically increased since the inception of the patent system. Therefore, patents can hinder the development and establishment of a new idea from early on, limiting the option to innovate to large corporations that can afford the legal costs incurred by the patenting process. Taken together, these tendencies lead to the creation of monopolies and subsequently induce market failure.
