Bio-Commons – towards responsible use of the digital biosphere
Rüdiger Trojok
Preface
At the Pixelache Unconference in Helsinki, June 2014, researchers, hackers and citizens from the European and Asian DIYbio scene (further referred to as ‘citizens’) with backgrounds in life sciences, engineering, the arts, philosophy and law discussed the requirements and conditions of Open-Source and Citizen-Science concepts to realize Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) in the Life Sciences. Citizens conceptualized a new intellectual property (IP) -regime for life-sciences to allow for a more productive use and generation of knowledge and innovation, further called “Bio-Commons”. In this article, I summarize the ideas and concepts and open questions concerning a future Bio-Commons life science research.
 
View out of the Bio-Commons conference hall, Vartiosaari island, Finland
The commons
Common goods are not owned by individuals and allow for use by everyone. Examples for common goods are natural commons such as air to breathe, fish in the oceans or a public meadow shared by farmers to feed their animals. With the increasing insights of the life sciences into the fundamental setup of nature, the idea of natural goods can also be applied on organisms, cells, genes, pathways and any conceivable resources found in any organisms. The concept can be further enlarged with the advent of genetic engineering and its successor: synthetic biology. Now, discoveries, inventions and man-made creations such as genetic codes, algorithms, novel metabolic pathways and molecular processes designed for and realized in biological media and even entire organisms can be considered as natural goods. A similar and recent problem was faced by the software developers during the 80s and 90s of the twentieth century. The debate in computer science on the subject of what nature digital algorithms are – physical or abstract, a creation, invention or mathematical discoveries - and how to make best use of them resulted in the formulation of a variety of digital licenses. Today, these licenses allow the creative and inventive potential of the programmer to be directly placed into the commons as a resource meant to be shared by all. The availability of decentralized creative commons in the internet enabled citizen around the globe to construct such complex and open systems such as Wikipedia and the Linux. These systems allow a great number of people and private enterprises to make use of sophisticated tools and knowledge at little to no. Despite the substantial success of commons in the digital world, there exists no similar licensing model for the life sciences. 
Intellectual property in the life sciences
To date, most societies rely mainly on IP in form of patents as means to enable and secure innovations in the life sciences. The productive use of intellectual property regimes based on patents today has reached its limits. During the workshop, citizens questioned the usefulness of the concept of patents for the natural resources unraveled through life science technologies. Precisely, how a genetic sequence, which was considered a digital code (a detailed examination of the ‘Code Duality’ see chapter ‘Bio-languages’), could fall under the protection of patents at all. Genetic code is highly redundant and the expressed proteins can have various context dependent functions. In enzymes for example, the same catalytic activity can be achieved by a variety of protein sequences, as only a few amino acid residues of the chain are evolutionary conserved. Furthermore, does not the artificial composition of a genetic code equate better to a creative procedure than to an actual invention and thus some kind of copyright based approach would eventually suit better? To apply for a patent, high costs for a patent search and international registration done by specialists have to be mounted by the inventor. The legal costs and risks can prevent individual inventors and small companies from securing their intellectual property through patents, limiting them in their abilities to cooperate and others in their abilities to build upon their work. A single patent becomes an asset as part of patent pool, far removed from its actual invention and its potential applications. Simultaneously, there is a tendency of patents to become increasingly ‘weak’, meaning is less focused on an actual invention and often simply applied for out of strategic considerations by big companies. The long lifetime of a patent (up to 20 years) further increases the difficulty to safely introduce new inventions to the market. Today, products are becoming increasingly complex depending on a large number of inventions. Further, the speed of innovation, especially of that in life sciences has dramatically increased since the inception of the patent system. Therefore, patents can hinder the development and establishment of a new idea from early on, limiting the option to innovate to large corporations that can afford the legal costs incurred by the patenting process. Taken together, these tendencies lead to the creation of monopolies and subsequently induce market failure.
Market failure: antibiotic resistance
A prominent and dangerous outcome of such a development in the medical sector is the decline of usable antibiotics in the market. A global citizen science community investigates the potential technological innovations to allow for decentralized and commons based drug discovery on the example of antibiotics. The project is called Biostrike and was started as a science-art based educational project.www.bio-commons.org/bio/strike. It was chosen to be developed further into a lighthouse project for the Bio-Commons and to address the technical, social and legal questions around the Bio-Commons. Citizens believed that the main reasons for the lack of development of new antibiotics lies in the existing organizational structures predominating in public and private life science and research. One reason is a lack of public research efforts to tackle big societal challenges – despite a general availability of skilled personnel and infrastructure. The existing publication model is based on competition of scientists to publish first in a journal of high renown, which hinders the free exchange of knowledge due to paywalls and competition. This attitude prevents a wider collaboration and open sharing of results and thus makes a global effort to develop new antibiotics extremely difficult. 
Another, even more problematic reason is a classical market failure https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_failure  in the pharmaceutical branch. Apart from the costs associated with regulation and cautious clinical testing of new pharmaceuticals market mechanisms contribute significantly to the increase in costs of drug research and development. The effect was described as ‘Eroom’s Law’, which refers to the exact opposite phenomenom described in Moore’s Law of the computer chip industry. Despite a steady exponential increase of available scientific information in the form of peer reviewed publications Citation Counts by Year of Publication; MEDLINE; U.S. National Library of Medicine; November 2013;http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/medline_cit_counts_yr_pub.html and digital database sizes Growth of GenBank and WGS;National Center for Biotechnology Information,U.S. National Library of Medicine; Jun 2014;http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/statistics, the number of new drugs which were introduced to the market per billion dollar spent fell exponentially.
Tragedy of the Anticommons
. However, market failure is not the only explanation of the antibiotics-crisis. It is equally a problem of the overuse of a common, termed “Tragedy of the commons”. This means that non-managed common goods, such as natural resources, can be exploited by everyone. Widely available and cheap antibiotics can be considered as a common good, too. Companies that develop antibiotics need to market the use of their drugs in order to get the necessary revenue to compensate their investments. However, the more they sell and the more antibiotics are consumed, the faster multi-resistant bacteria develop. And the overuse of antibiotics creates resistant bacteria which can affect everyone. A ‘Market Failure’ in combination with the ‘Tragedy of the Commons’ thus becomes the ‘Tragedy of the Anticommons’.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anticommons The Anticommons problem arises when ambiguous and conflicting intellectual property claims offer worst of both worlds by deterring sharing and weakening investment incentives. As a countermeasure, users, distributors and producers of antibiotics should be obliged to be prudent with marketing and consumption of the antibiotics. Fewer sales and less consumption however reduce profit margins and lead to increased product costs. Thus, the incentives for private companies are further lowered to invest into antibiotics development.
EU Joins Widening Push to Find New Antibiotics; Sten Stovall; The Wall Street Journal; 24 May 2012;http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304707604577423683954355876
Bio-Commons
How to overcome this breakdown of innovation and in the same time fix the urgent antibiotics problem? The innovation process has to become more efficient to leverage the development costs. Alternative IP regimes such as open-access and open-source could in future help to leverage the costs for research and development in the life sciences, to mobilize unused knowledge, spark new inventions, be more adaptable to actual innovation speed and thus overcome the market failure situation. The bios organization states:
“Extraordinary efficiencies occur when the tools of innovation are shared, are dynamically enhanced, have increased levels of confidence (legal and otherwise) associated with their use, and are low or no-cost.” Science as Social Enterprise; Richard Jefferson; innovations; 2006;http://www.bios.net/daisy/bios/3067/version/default/part/AttachmentData/data/INNOV0104_pp13-44_innovations-in-practice_jefferson.pdf
—Richard Jefferson
A Bio-Commons license puts discovery and inventions in the life science under a common regulation, can serve to decentralized biological innovation, while at the same time allow for bigger cooperative projects. In consequence, the Bio-Commons license could even replace the need for patent thickets. Therefore, global and decentralized collaboration of scientists and citizens should be encouraged to speed up the development of new antibiotics. Such a new, decentralized way to handle the vast amounts of knowledge created in the life-science, raise questions on how to deal with intellectual property in general.
“Could the development of new antibiotics be encouraged by the government? By simplifying how they are licensed and providing financial incentives, more drugs could be discovered.”Human vs. superbug: Too late to turn the tide?; Liz Bonnin; BBC;http://www.bbc.co.uk/guides/z8kccdm
—Liz Bonnin
Citizens and scientists could participate within a global community around Biostrike, collaborating to find new antibiotics. Specialists from all fields of expertise would put together their knowledge to build the tool sets – that is wetware, hardware and software – to enable decentralized research on antibiotics. Decentralizing the screening for antibiotics around the world could on one hand reduce the costs of research as more people would contribute voluntarily and on the other hand increase the chances to discover new compounds, as citizens of a diverse range of countries have direct access to a wide variety of ecosystems and local knowledge. The community would thus collect data in forms of publications, texts, machine readouts and pictures and most importantly, DNA-sequences of yet undiscovered organisms. 

Excursus: Bio-language
“If it is not true it is very well invented.”http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Giordano_Bruno
—Giordano Bruno
To fruitfully initiate a broader discussion about the underlying principles for the Bio-Commons, a mutually understandable bio-language needs to be developed which allows all stakeholders to address relevant questions. To develop such a language, stakeholders need to become familiar with the materialistic and the abstract aspects of living systems. A living system here means any life-form consisting of a single or multitude of cells and the corresponding matter it requires for sustained survival. According to the concept of ‘Code Duality’ by Jesper Hoffmeyer, the code of life appears as a ‘digital’ redescription of an ‘analog’ function and structure. Or in other words: life can be considered software and hardware in one. The analog structure and function themselves are thus the materialistically pronounced version of the digital code, while the digital code has no meaning without its analog counterpart. Jesper Hoffmeyer describes in his book that a living system necessarily constructs a description of itself in order to perpetuate itself. 
Jesper Hoffmeyer; 2008; Biosemiotics: signs of life and life of signs; University of Scranton Press; ISBN 978-58966-169-1
He distinguishes two codes that are mutually referring to one another which he calls the digital and analog. Both codes encode each other, with the digital serving as a long term memory and the analog interacting with the physical world. The analog thus carries forth the digital memory through time, while the digital continuously renews the analog. By this self-reference the identity of the living system can be established. A recent development emerging at the intersection of synthetic and systems biology is to describe the digital code in form of biological programming languages. The goal of this approach is to find adequate hierarchies of abstraction, modularization and standardization to make biological design easier. A future bio-designer should thus be able to code the properties of a living system on a computer by simply describing the desired features in the biological programming language. The program will then compile a genetic code, which is subsequently synthesized, transformed into an organism and then tested and debugged in the living system – the analog counterpart of the digital code. To date it is hardly possible to blueprint functional genetic parts that work in the real world ab initio. Eventually, humans will refine the Bio-language to a point at which we will ‘speak’ it fluently, intuitively understanding the essential underlying mechanisms of the analog and digital code of living systems. Such an approach is not reductionist and cannot be deterministic, but is an iterative and highly creative process. Erich Berger from the Finnish Society of Bioart correctly notes that
“there is [also] a realization of the kinship between art and science. […] One fundamental reason [for artists to involve in biology] is the realization that life sciences and technology are among the most potent forces transforming our life-world. Genetically modified organisms, synthetic biology, and environmental concerns lead artists to engage with the sciences behind these developments to find a cultural response to new emerging questions and issues concerning society.”Erich Berger and Laura Beloff; Five years ofart&science work by the Finnish Society of Bioart at Kilpisjärvi Biological Station; Ars Bioarctica; unpublished material
Bio-Ethics Imprinting
Concerning the life sciences, the general weakness of the prevailing IP system is further complicated by ethical problems arising through the advancing technical interventions in the foundations of biological existence – especially that of human life. To date it is not entirely clear how far the interventions will go and where the limit of technological control over living systems lies. However, it should be assumed that with increasing knowledge and technical skill, the sphere in which intentional interventions are possible will be expanded further. An exponential development of key technologies such as DNA-sequencing, DNA-synthesis and also automation, miniaturization and decentralization of laboratory practices underlines this prospective assumption. With the proposed Bio-Commons license model, biological innovation should be put into service to society and at the same time, limit the potential for misuse of knowledge and material. Before creating a legal framework for the Bio-Commons, the social relations and assumptions underlying an idea of the Bio-Commons need to be addressed. Citizens considered the Bio-Commons as relationship and agreement between people, as eventually, the concept of property comes into conflict with ethical values. Thus, there will have to be a decision on where to draw the divisive line between a fact- and value based reference system for the Bio-Commons. It will have to be determined to what extent biological innovation can be seen as a cultural good and in how far it is a product subject to market mechanisms. Fundamental ideas as right of self-determination, the definition of individuality, the human rights (Compare the universal declaration of human rights articles 1- 5 http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/) and the ontology of life itself need to be renegotiated or reinterpreted when formulating the ethical principles for the Bio-Commons.
Conclusion
The ‘classical’ examples of natural commons often end in tragedy: due to a lack of management, individuals act egoistically and overuse the resource until it is finally depleted. The result is contrary to the interest of the community and also to the disadvantage of the individual. However, this argument does not apply on digital goods that are copyable. Depending on the sophistication of the sequencing technology, its market price and global availability, theoretically, an enormous number of organisms could be digitally analyzed and uploaded. The only physical limit for digital goods is the available computation power and the energy needed for computation. As long as these factors are available in abundance, a ‘classical’ tragedy of the digital commons is highly unlikely, and the digital goods are practically inexhaustible. The code duality of living systems allows for a digital redescription of genetic code. This digital information can be copied and shared in the internet at almost no cost. When translated back into the analog counterpart, meaning the phenotype of a cell, e.g. by synthesizing the DNA and transforming a cell, the digital information that comes for free can be converted into highly valuable substances. The Bio-Commons license could make licensing easier for researchers and thereby stabilize global collaborations that will help to overcome the ‘Tragedy of the Anticommons’ as described for the situation around antibiotics research. 

 
Schematic showing the logical dependencies of future research and development in the life science based on hypothetical Bio-Commons licenses. Besides a software based infrastructure for handling the knowledge in the life sciences (for a more detailed examination on the use of software see Bio-Strike Whitepaper in this Biocoder issue), various versions of Bio-Commons Licenses could be used by laboratories to base their research on. Such Bio-Commons licenses would in return require a Bio-Legislation with a new concept of intellectual property in the life sciences. Besides, a future Bio-Legislation could directly regulate software in order to guarantee lawful conduct of R&D. To establish this future Bio-Legislation, Bio-Ethics need to be advanced, relating most recent as well as foreseeable future development in the life sciences to social and moral demands. To precisely formulate a new Bio-Legislation, a mutually understandable Bio-Language needs to be developed in order to adequately describe the 'analog' and 'digital' aspects of living systems.


Looking ahead, a “phase shift” from analog to digital biological information will happen. Vast numbers of biological systems will be digitalized by high throughput sequencing and parameterization of biological samples. To date, many ecospheres like coral reefs are recognized as a world heritage and thus belong to the natural commons. In future, these could become digitalized, quantified and eventually monetized. Ultimately, the digital redescription of the natural world will be mixed with human inventions and creations that will become increasingly indistinguishable and interdependent. To address the social and ethical implications of Bio-design is not only the responsibility of the scientists, but requires involvement of a wide variety of stakeholders. As the Bio-language is exactly the point, where human culture, the digital and the analog aspect of biological systems intersect, it is an ideal ground to allow societies to precisely shape their biological realities. The development of a new Bio-language opens the possibility for responsible research and innovation already at the stage of the design of a new living system. Bio-Commons licenses could be used to manage any type of biological knowledge formulated in such Bio-languages.

http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=42855&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html,http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/?search=reef&searchSites=&search_by_country=&region=&search_yearinscribed=&themes=&criteria_restrication=&type=&media=&order=country&description= 
The Bio-Commons license should be able to cover natural, rational and creative In-Silico bio-designs generated by the community of researchers as a whole. Licenses with a solid ethical foundation, smart and convenient knowledge handling, low costs of maintenance and a widely accepted Bio-legislation foundation will be most attractive. Eventually, policy makers might need to adapt some existing regulation like laws on intellectual property in the life science to encompass these new licensing regimes. Citizens, scientists of all field as well as policy makers are welcome to help to build a civil society around the Bio-Commons and to find the best way to make use thereof. Please add your contributions on the Github based website on Bio-Commons http://www.bio-commons.org/




Acknowledgment
The Bio-Commons workshop was organized by the Finnish Society of Bioart and hosted at Camp Pixelache 2014 Helsinki. The Bio-Commons workshop was supported by SYNENERGENE, funded by the 7th Framework Programme of the European Union. Many thanks to all participants of the Pixelache unconference for their valuable input and the great discussions. Special thanks to Günther Seyfried and Phillip Böing for critical review of the text and Eugenio Battaglio and Leander Damme for preparing the website. My gratitude goes also to the sponsorshttp://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/home_en.html
http://www.synenergene.eu/ and the organizershttp://www.pixelache.ac/
http://bioartsociety.fi/ of the unconference.
 

Rüdiger Trojok
Berlin 03 September 2014
By order of the Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS)
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

